README.md, before:

# Descartes SDK Tutorials

This project contains tutorial DApps implemented with the Descartes SDK, as documented in https://cartesi.io/docs/

## Getting Started

### Requirements

- docker
- docker-compose
- node 12.x
- yarn
- truffle

### Cloning

```
$ git clone git@github.com:cartesi/descartes-tutorials.git
```
or using the http address:
```
$ git clone https://github.com/cartesi/descartes-tutorials.git
```

### Environment

All tutorials in this repository are designed to interact with [Descartes](https://github.com/cartesi/descartes) nodes running locally.
Both the tutorials and the Descartes nodes are configured to interact with a local [ganache](https://github.com/trufflesuite/ganache-cli) instance running at `localhost:8545`. The environment is configured for two actors, `alice` and `bob`, each of which has an account in the `ganache` instance as well as a corresponding Descartes node.

To initialize the local `ganache` network and deploy the `Descartes` smart contract there, execute:
```bash
$ cd descartes-env
$ make deploy
```
(you should manually stop the ganache instance once deploy is complete)

To run the entire environment, execute:
```bash
$ cd descartes-env
$ docker-compose up
```


## Running a DApp tutorial

Each subdirectory contains an independent DApp tutorial. Each tutorial consists of:
- A smart contract, along with any dependencies and migrations
- The specification of a Cartesi Machine that performs a computation

To run each tutorial, first `cd` into its directory. For instance:
```bash
$ cd helloworld
```

Then build the DApp's Cartesi Machine and store it in an appropriate directory accessible by the Descartes nodes. To do this, execute the following:
```bash
$ cd cartesi-machine
$ ./build-cartesi-machine.sh ../../descartes-env/machines
```
> **Note:** for some tutorials, building an appropriate machine requires a custom `rootfs.ext2` file-system drive. This process is [documented here](https://docs.cartesi.io/machine/target/linux#the-root-file-system). More specific instructions are given within each tutorial.

Install, compile and migrate the DApp's smart contract (project configuration is set to use the same local ganache instance used by the Descartes nodes):
```bash
$ yarn
$ truffle migrate
```

Once this is done, the DApp can be tested using `truffle console`. For instance, for the HelloWorld DApp one can use:
```bash
$ truffle console
truffle(development)> web3.eth.getAccounts()
[
  '0xe9bE0C14D35c5fA61B8c0B34f4c4e2891eC12e7E',
  '0x91472CCE70B1080FdD969D41151F2763a4A22717'
]
truffle(development)> hw = await HelloWorld.deployed()
truffle(development)> hw.instantiate('0xe9bE0C14D35c5fA61B8c0B34f4c4e2891eC12e7E', '0x91472CCE70B1080FdD969D41151F2763a4A22717')
```

After the computation completes, it will be possible to query the results:
```bash
truffle(development)> res = await hw.getResult(0)
truffle(development)> res
Result {
    '0': true,
    '1': false,
    '2': '0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000',
    '3': '0x48656c6c6f20576f726c64210a00000000000000000000000000000000000000'
}
truffle(development)> web3.utils.toAscii(res['3'])
'Hello World!\n\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
```

## Creating a new DApp

First of all, create a subdirectory for the DApp and initialize it with truffle:
```bash
$ mkdir mydapp
$ cd mydapp
$ truffle init
```

To use the local `ganache` instance, we must edit `truffle-config.js` to specify port 8545 for network ID 7777:
```javascript
  networks: {
    development: {
     host: "127.0.0.1",     // Localhost (default: none)
     port: 8545,            // Ganache CLI port (default: none)
     network_id: "7777",    // test network (default: none)
    },
  },
```

Add project dependency to Descartes and to `@truffle/contract` (used for migrating the smart contracts):
```bash
$ yarn add @cartesi/descartes-sdk
$ yarn add @truffle/contract
```

Create the smart contract for the DApp in `./contracts` (e.g., `./contracts/MyDapp.sol`). It should import `DescartesInterface` to be able to use the Descartes contract:
```javascript
pragma solidity >=0.4.25 <0.7.0;
pragma experimental ABIEncoderV2;

import "@cartesi/descartes-sdk/contracts/DescartesInterface.sol";

contract MyDapp {
    DescartesInterface descartes;

    constructor(address descartesAddress) public {
        descartes = DescartesInterface(descartesAddress);
    }
}
```

Create a migration file `./migrations/2_deploy_contracts.js` to publish the DApp smart contract linked to the Descartes smart contract:
```javascript
const contract = require("@truffle/contract");
const Descartes = contract(require("../../descartes-env/blockchain/node_modules/@cartesi/descartes-sdk/build/contracts/Descartes.json"));
const MyDapp = artifacts.require("MyDapp");

module.exports = function(deployer) {
  Descartes.setNetwork(deployer.network_id);
  deployer.deploy(MyDapp, Descartes.address);
};
```

Run `truffle migrate` to publish contract to the network:
```bash
$ truffle migrate
```


## Using local Descartes build (optional)

In order to run these tutorials with a local build of the [Descartes project](https://github.com/cartesi/descartes), first of all clone that repository, making sure to include the submodules. For instance:

```bash
$ cd ..
$ git clone --recurse-submodules git@github.com:cartesi/descartes.git
```

Then, build the Descartes Docker image (this will take some time):

```bash
$ cd descartes
$ docker build . -t cartesi/descartes:latest
```

After that, use Yarn to pack Descartes' dependencies as a gzip compressed file, and place that file inside the `descartes-env/deployer` directory within `descartes-tutorials`. For instance:

```bash
$ yarn pack --filename ../descartes-tutorials/descartes-env/deployer/cartesi-descartes-sdk-latest.tgz
```

Back in the `descartes-tutorials` project, change the Docker Compose configuration used by your local Environment by editing `descartes-env/docker-compose.yml`, so that `alice`'s and `bob`'s dispatchers use the newly built Docker image:

```yml
  ...
  alice_dispatcher:
    image: cartesi/descartes:latest
  ...
  bob_dispatcher:
    image: cartesi/descartes:latest
  ...
```

Then, `cd` into the `descartes-env/deployer` directory and use Yarn to make sure the local Descartes Environment uses the generated gzip file with Descartes' dependencies:

```bash
$ cd ./descartes-env/deployer
$ yarn add file:./cartesi-descartes-sdk-latest.tgz
```

At this point, you can clean up your Descartes Environment and redeploy it with the updated setup:

```bash
$ cd ..
$ sudo make clean
$ make deploy
$ docker-compose up
```

Finally, `cd` into the tutorial project of interest, and also ensure it uses the same generated gzip file with Descartes' dependencies:

```bash
$ cd ../<tutorial-project>
$ yarn add file:../descartes-env/deployer/cartesi-descartes-sdk-latest.tgz
```

## Contributing

Thank you for your interest in Cartesi! Head over to our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for instructions on how to sign our Contributors Agreement and get started with Cartesi!

Please note we have a [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md), please follow it in all your interactions with the project.

Commit message:

Fix HelloWorld templateHash and how to stop env
- HelloWorld templateHash was still reflecting old parameter
`--append-rom-bootargs="quiet"`, no longer used
- README docs recommending removing volumes when stopping descartes-env
- Makefile clean task now shutting down descartes-env and cleaning its
volumes

README.md, after:

# Descartes SDK Tutorials

This project contains tutorial DApps implemented with the Descartes SDK, as documented in https://cartesi.io/docs/

## Getting Started

### Requirements

- docker
- docker-compose
- node 12.x
- yarn
- truffle

### Cloning

```
$ git clone git@github.com:cartesi/descartes-tutorials.git
```
or using the http address:
```
$ git clone https://github.com/cartesi/descartes-tutorials.git
```

### Environment

All tutorials in this repository are designed to interact with [Descartes](https://github.com/cartesi/descartes) nodes running locally.
Both the tutorials and the Descartes nodes are configured to interact with a local [ganache](https://github.com/trufflesuite/ganache-cli) instance running at `localhost:8545`. The environment is configured for two actors, `alice` and `bob`, each of which has an account in the `ganache` instance as well as a corresponding Descartes node.

To initialize the local `ganache` network and deploy the `Descartes` smart contract there, execute:
```bash
$ cd descartes-env
$ make deploy
```
(you should manually stop the ganache instance once deploy is complete)

To run the entire environment, execute:
```bash
$ cd descartes-env
$ docker-compose up
```

ATTENTION: to shutdown the environment, remember to remove volumes when stopping the containers:
```bash
$ docker-compose down -v
```


## Running a DApp tutorial

Each subdirectory contains an independent DApp tutorial. Each tutorial consists of:
- A smart contract, along with any dependencies and migrations
- The specification of a Cartesi Machine that performs a computation

To run each tutorial, first `cd` into its directory. For instance:
```bash
$ cd helloworld
```

Then build the DApp's Cartesi Machine and store it in an appropriate directory accessible by the Descartes nodes. To do this, execute the following:
```bash
$ cd cartesi-machine
$ ./build-cartesi-machine.sh ../../descartes-env/machines
```
> **Note:** for some tutorials, building an appropriate machine requires a custom `rootfs.ext2` file-system drive. This process is [documented here](https://docs.cartesi.io/machine/target/linux#the-root-file-system). More specific instructions are given within each tutorial.

Install, compile and migrate the DApp's smart contract (project configuration is set to use the same local ganache instance used by the Descartes nodes):
```bash
$ yarn
$ truffle migrate
```

Once this is done, the DApp can be tested using `truffle console`. For instance, for the HelloWorld DApp one can use:
```bash
$ truffle console
truffle(development)> web3.eth.getAccounts()
[
  '0xe9bE0C14D35c5fA61B8c0B34f4c4e2891eC12e7E',
  '0x91472CCE70B1080FdD969D41151F2763a4A22717'
]
truffle(development)> hw = await HelloWorld.deployed()
truffle(development)> hw.instantiate('0xe9bE0C14D35c5fA61B8c0B34f4c4e2891eC12e7E', '0x91472CCE70B1080FdD969D41151F2763a4A22717')
```

After the computation completes, it will be possible to query the results:
```bash
truffle(development)> res = await hw.getResult(0)
truffle(development)> res
Result {
    '0': true,
    '1': false,
    '2': '0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000',
    '3': '0x48656c6c6f20576f726c64210a00000000000000000000000000000000000000'
}
truffle(development)> web3.utils.toAscii(res['3'])
'Hello World!\n\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
```

## Creating a new DApp

First of all, create a subdirectory for the DApp and initialize it with truffle:
```bash
$ mkdir mydapp
$ cd mydapp
$ truffle init
```

To use the local `ganache` instance, we must edit `truffle-config.js` to specify port 8545 for network ID 7777:
```javascript
  networks: {
    development: {
     host: "127.0.0.1",     // Localhost (default: none)
     port: 8545,            // Ganache CLI port (default: none)
     network_id: "7777",    // test network (default: none)
    },
  },
```

Add project dependency to Descartes and to `@truffle/contract` (used for migrating the smart contracts):
```bash
$ yarn add @cartesi/descartes-sdk
$ yarn add @truffle/contract
```

Create the smart contract for the DApp in `./contracts` (e.g., `./contracts/MyDapp.sol`). It should import `DescartesInterface` to be able to use the Descartes contract:
```javascript
pragma solidity >=0.4.25 <0.7.0;
pragma experimental ABIEncoderV2;

import "@cartesi/descartes-sdk/contracts/DescartesInterface.sol";

contract MyDapp {
    DescartesInterface descartes;

    constructor(address descartesAddress) public {
        descartes = DescartesInterface(descartesAddress);
    }
}
```

Create a migration file `./migrations/2_deploy_contracts.js` to publish the DApp smart contract linked to the Descartes smart contract:
```javascript
const contract = require("@truffle/contract");
const Descartes = contract(require("../../descartes-env/blockchain/node_modules/@cartesi/descartes-sdk/build/contracts/Descartes.json"));
const MyDapp = artifacts.require("MyDapp");

module.exports = function(deployer) {
  Descartes.setNetwork(deployer.network_id);
  deployer.deploy(MyDapp, Descartes.address);
};
```

Run `truffle migrate` to publish contract to the network:
```bash
$ truffle migrate
```


## Using local Descartes build (optional)

In order to run these tutorials with a local build of the [Descartes project](https://github.com/cartesi/descartes), first of all clone that repository, making sure to include the submodules. For instance:

```bash
$ cd ..
$ git clone --recurse-submodules git@github.com:cartesi/descartes.git
```

Then, build the Descartes Docker image (this will take some time):

```bash
$ cd descartes
$ docker build . -t cartesi/descartes:latest
```

After that, use Yarn to pack Descartes' dependencies as a gzip compressed file, and place that file inside the `descartes-env/deployer` directory within `descartes-tutorials`. For instance:

```bash
$ yarn pack --filename ../descartes-tutorials/descartes-env/deployer/cartesi-descartes-sdk-latest.tgz
```

Back in the `descartes-tutorials` project, change the Docker Compose configuration used by your local Environment by editing `descartes-env/docker-compose.yml`, so that `alice`'s and `bob`'s dispatchers use the newly built Docker image:

```yml
  ...
  alice_dispatcher:
    image: cartesi/descartes:latest
  ...
  bob_dispatcher:
    image: cartesi/descartes:latest
  ...
```

Then, `cd` into the `descartes-env/deployer` directory and use Yarn to make sure the local Descartes Environment uses the generated gzip file with Descartes' dependencies:

```bash
$ cd ./descartes-env/deployer
$ yarn add file:./cartesi-descartes-sdk-latest.tgz
```

At this point, you can clean up your Descartes Environment and redeploy it with the updated setup:

```bash
$ cd ..
$ sudo make clean
$ make deploy
$ docker-compose up
```

Finally, `cd` into the tutorial project of interest, and also ensure it uses the same generated gzip file with Descartes' dependencies:

```bash
$ cd ../<tutorial-project>
$ yarn add file:../descartes-env/deployer/cartesi-descartes-sdk-latest.tgz
```

## Contributing

Thank you for your interest in Cartesi! Head over to our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for instructions on how to sign our Contributors Agreement and get started with Cartesi!

Please note we have a [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md), please follow it in all your interactions with the project.
